 Transcriber's Notes:
 Project Gutenberg has two versions of Little Women by Louisa May Alcott. Original Edition Illustrated Edition
 Welcome to the Project Gutenberg Illustrated Edition of Little Women by Louisa May Alcott, published by Little, Brown, and Company. Some versions of the book, such as this one, use the full title of the book from the title page, _Little Women; Or Meg, Jo, Beth, and Amy_.
 We used the version of the book from Little, Brown, and Company: copyright 1896, for this transcription. A scanned copy of this book is available through the internet archive, courtesy of the New York Public Library.
 A copy of the first version of the novel, published in 1869, was consulted for emendations, the proper rendering of words hyphenated and split between two lines for spacing, and other issues in transcribing the novel. We are not trying to change this version of the novel back to the 1869 novel, but correct the errors that were made in re-transcribing and updating the text.
 Passages in italics were indicated by _underscores_.
 Passages in bold were indicated by =equal signs=.
 Small caps were replaced with ALL CAPS.
 Throughout the dialogues, there were words used to mimic accents of the speakers. Those words were retained as-is.
 Errors in punctuations and hyphenation were not corrected unless otherwise noted below.
 A note about spacing of illustrations: If there are four lines above the illustration, then the illustration was at the top of a new chapter. If there are four lines below the illustration, then the illustration was at the end of a chapter. If there is two lines between a chapter heading and the illustration, then the illustration was an inline illustration (usually a drop-cap illustration).
 The illustrations have been moved so that they do not break up paragraphs and so that they are next to the text they illustrate, thus the page number of the illustration might not match the page number in the List of Illustrations.
 On page vii, in the Table of Contents, change page 7 to 1 for the beginning of Chapter One.
 In the List of Illustrations, for the illustration on page 147, "postmistress" was replaced with "post-mistress".
 In the List of Illustrations, for the illustration on page 235, "tea-pot" was replaced with "teapot".
 On page 30, the punctuation after 'stained they are' may be a colon, but on page 41 of the 1869 book, it is a semicolon. We used the semi-colon.
 On page 34, transcribe red-headed with the hyphen. See page 44 of the
